When
were you first employed by NASA? I think it was
about 1962 when I started working here. How old
were you? I was 21. And what was your position? I was
working as a research scientist for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration and went to
work in Cleveland, Ohio working on trying to
determine how it was going to go to the moon and what
procedures would go up there and what type of
launch vehicles it was going to use and the size of
the vehicles and the procedures at which we would
go about putting man on the moon. What is your
current position at NASA? I'm currently heading
up the Projects Office, Operations Office for the
Space Station Project Office. And this involves
overseeing the overall space station design and
making sure that all the operational
considerations and how you're going to work with
the station is considered into the design. And
working any design problems we have in terms of
operations and generally the integration of that
whole activity. What various programs have you
been involved in at NASA since you've been
employed here? I started out really in the later
days in the Mercury program and went through the,
totally through the Gemini program, the Apollo
program, the Skylab program, the ASTP program,
the Apollo Soyuz program, and of course for the
last 10 years or 10 or 12 years we've been working on
the space or the SDS space transportation system
and the orbiters operations and now I'm currently
involved in the space station design
development. I've actually worked on all the
manned, two manned flights in terms of anytime you
had to rendezvous or anything like that with
vehicles then I was over to all those flights.
How were our programs at NASA influenced by the
desire to beat the Russians in establishing U.S.
preeminence in space?
That definitely had a big push back in the early
days of getting man into space because there was
concern about what the Russians was going to do in
space and etc. It was a big challenge back in the
early days to try to beat the Russians. We had a
really big battle trying to determine if we was
going to beat them to the moon or not. And it was
never really clear when they decided not to go to
the moon. But he was definitely ahead of us in terms
of unmanned activities, and we did catch up with
him. and have passed them over the last few years.
That's probably, excuse me, primarily the reason
Russians got a big jump on us was that when they
built the boosters and things for their ray bombs
and hydrogen bombs, they didn't try to clean them
up. They had to have large launch vehicles to make
them intercontinental, and therefore that size
of booster did have also the capability of
achieving orbit, where in turns we had took off,
took into the policy of making clean bombs, making
the bombs small, taking smaller launch vehicles,
and when the Russians decided to put a satellite
into orbit, they had the launch vehicle to do it,
and when we saw them do that, put them ahead of us
considerably. We tried to do it, we didn't have a
launch vehicle to do it, so we had to go out and build
a launch vehicle from scratch. So therefore, we
was in a catch-up mode for several years. Does
Russia have a shuttle now, or where are they right
now? Or do we know? There is some pretty good
feeling, I guess, where they're at. They've done a
pretty good feel and man presence in space,
they've got their own space station. They've been
operating it for several years now, I don't know
exactly how many, and they have manned it many
times with various lengths of cruise stay time
going up to several months at one time. So, as far as
man's presence in space and running the basic
experiments and that sort of stuff, they have
That's what they've been concentrating on. There
are some feelings that they're building that also
will be on the space shuttle. It'll be a few years
probably before that gets completed, but they're
evidently working on that. And what else they're
doing, I'm not really too much upon that. When you
worked in Moscow guiding the Apollo-Soyuz flight
in 1975, what differences did you notice between
our space agency and theirs?
Are there, is their agency primary militaristic?
What did you notice? Well, the control center is
located on a military base behind armed guards,
concrete walls several feet high. That would
imply it was a little more materialistic than what
our program has been. I'd say yes,
it probably is in those terms.
What was the other part of that question? I'm
sorry. What differences did you notice between
our space agency and theirs? Well, that can get
into a couple of days worth of discussion in case we
try to make it short.
They had a lot more control over their people, I
think, than we have over ours in terms of, they
didn't
let the left hand know what the right hand was doing
as much as we do.
In terms of the actual operations, they have,
they actually have three control centers that
where we have one control center feeding
information up to any particular activity on
orbit. They may have changed that over the recent
years, but when we was there, that's what they had.
As far as getting down to detail, I guess what we're
really talking about here is how you actually
operate. They had, the control center is
remarkably laid out like ours was. It was almost a
identical copy. And since there's control
centers built after ours, ones we worked out of, I
have my own assumption there is that they copied
ours. Even all the way down to console positions
actually, front row, second row, third row,
fourth row, console positions. As far as
operating in the control center itself, one of the
things that we've always done in our console
positions is that You could always overhear what
the flight director was saying. Most people would
overhear on their comm lines what flight
directors were talking to other people about. The
Russian control procedure there was to say that
you had individual comm lines, so you couldn't
sort of eavesdrop on what was happening. That was a
little bit more, keeping you more boxed in on what
you were doing. The state of the art of the control
center was was way, way beyond ours, or way behind
ours in that they only had one computer generated
display in the control center itself that we could
see where we have at that time all of our displays
were computer generated. Their main way of
displaying data was taking computer pronounced
software computers and actually put him on a TV
camera and project him with TV cameras. As an
agent, I was talking more or less in terms of
operations, and I guess we can get into more detail
on that if we wanted to, but jumping there back to
what was the difference in their operations and
how they worked versus how we worked, there's a
couple, I think, unique characteristics there.
One was they took and they would have single
objective flights. Otherwise the B-1 do one. I
forget how many launches they made in getting
prepared for the Apollo service mission, but they
probably made a half a dozen launches just to check
out systems and check out procedures and that sort
of thing. In fact, we didn't have any launches to
get in preparation for the Paul Sawyer's flight.
But they have single objective missions, and if
they achieve that objective successfully, they
come back. And if they don't, they launch again and
try it again. And where we try to pack our flights,
and considered on-orbit time is very valuable and
we spend many, many hours trying to overlay the
timelines so if something doesn't work, we pull up
something else to try to fill in that timeline. So
maybe do you think because their government
completely supports their program and we don't
have quite as much, maybe we don't have as much
money to spend meticulously doing that kind of
thing? I think it has a lot to do with it, yes I do.
they have, they're less accountable to the people
on how they spend their military, military,
excuse me, how they do their space operations and
their budgets. And they're not constrained as
much as we are because we're accountable to the
general public and everybody's down to one side
and listens in on everything that's happening and
we're constantly covered by the news media and
totally open to the public. So, which makes us have
to pack everything we can into a particular
flight, which is involved and does cost a lot of
money to do that. But that's one of the main things I
could see a difference in terms of all flight
planning and that sort of stuff is how they worked.
But the control was basically the same as ours.
with the exception of the way they actually did the
internal control at the center, and the comm lines
and such stuff. They seemed to be a little more,
I don't want to say secretive, that's not
necessarily the right words, but they tried to
keep everybody with blinders on and looking down
into certain paths and not be able to oversee. One
thing I guess I got the impression of is that If you
had an expertise in one particular field, and I had
an expertise in another different field, and I was
talking to a third individual who we would
interface with, and if him and I would make a
decision that would affect you, well I would I
would come back and call you up and say, hey look,
Allison, Joe and I made this decision. I think it's
going to affect your area and etc. You ought to be
prepared for this or try to go talk to them and work
it out. And we would do that. That's a common way we
work. I feel that the Russian system is not
incentive to do that, so I wouldn't come back and
call you up. I'd let you find out yourself.
Okay,
how were you treated by the Russian people overall
as far as your stay? Not necessarily the
people at the station, but just the people when you
were there? I couldn't have been treated better by
any group of people, either engineers working
with them or also the general public. I spent a lot
of my spare time amongst the local people. One was
accepted with totally open arms. It was really
neat. I spent many hours talking to people who knew
less English than I knew Russian, and I knew about
six words of Russian.
You made a lot of use of a pencil and a piece of paper.
You learn to talk with your hands a lot, and of
course, unfortunately, you can only get to a
certain level of understanding of each other,
because we are communicating, I guess, what would
a space agency call on a level A or top level of
amount of communications, where you and I are
conversing on a CD type level, otherwise a detail
level of communications. They were
absolutely astounding people, and that at any
time you had time to talk to them and discuss
something with them, they was there, they would
make time for you, if it's three o'clock, four
o'clock, five o'clock, six o'clock in the
morning. They'd have a pot of tea on, they called it
chai, and very eager to learn about us and our ways
and what we did and that sort of stuff. So it was sort
of a very interesting experience to go in and talk
to those people. It's so much different than I
think the United States are. I think they treated
us a lot better than we treated them as
individuals. They weren't suspicious of you or
anything like that? No, ma'am. Not to be sure, not
really suspicious. It was really, of course now I
have to go back on the other hands too, though some
people really didn't know what I was doing. The
Europeans, especially Eastern European
countries and all of Russia was totally, at least
the Russians, were totally behind this
involvement we had in the space, where in the
United States we treated it as as hey, that's
something NASA's doing and not much involvement
and maybe heard about it once a month. Well, I don't
think it's a day went by that I didn't hear
something about the Apollo Soyuz program on TV or
on radio while I was stationed there. They come out
with all kinds of souvenirs, they even had a brand
of cigarettes called Apollo Soyuz that was issued
on the day of launch. and special stamps and
special plaques and they really had the people
really pumped up for it. They put a lot into it. So
therefore, that
essentially is what the country was putting
behind it. This is a big thing for them and they
really pushed the people for it too. But anyhow, we
had a
The excitement and the involvement I don't think
was totally in my communications with some of the
Russian people. Their openness and friendliness
towards me had really, I don't think, that much to
do with what I was doing. How did your impressions
and attitudes toward the Russians change from the
time, you know, what were your attitudes before
you went, and then what did you come back, you know,
feeling for the Russians? I tell anybody that's
traveling to Russia the first time, second time,
third time, let me tell you my fourth trip to really
start understanding the Russian system, and the
first time you go there, your basic travel people
or travel bureau's interest, interest will show
you some neat things and show you a lot of history,
and naturally it'll give you the best propaganda.
and keep you busy enough that you don't. Now I
wasn't, don't get me wrong, I wasn't with
interest, but you sort of got effectively the same
treatment. That you get so involved in what's
going on that you don't really have time to look
around and see what's really happening around
you. And it's only after about the third or fourth
trip or encounter that you really start getting
the total feel of the impression of the people. the
constraints on the society, and what you're
really constrained with. For example, you can't
go outside of Moscow without a permit. Two years
before I was there, you couldn't go outside your
block area, your two or three block area that
you're living in, after 10 o'clock at night, and if
you did, you lost your job. What happens? You lose
your job, you don't eat. all the jobs are
controlled by the government, so you have to be
approved by the government to get the job. If you
don't have a job permit, you can't get it. If you
don't get it, you can't eat. So it's quite a drastic
effect on you. Your movement is very constrained
and etc., so you have no cars. You don't? No cars.
They do have the world's greatest transport
system for people, though. They have a fantastic
system for public transport. And the combination
of the subways and their trains and their buses and
everything like that is, I don't, I haven't seen
anything equal in the world. You were talking
about the permits you had to get to leave Moscow.
What did that require doing? Well, we didn't,
actually I was constrained to the Moscow region,
so anything, we did take some bus trips outside of
Moscow. But I'm talking about the people who live
there. Like, for example, if you was a Russian, you
would have had to go down to the local office and got
a permit to come here to see me today for Brian. You
couldn't do that. You had to state your business.
You had to state your locality. So for you to travel
outside of your area, region, like, say, Brian,
Texas, you would have to go down and apply for a
permit to leave. and have to carry your papers with
you. It's sort of like, it's sort of equivalent to
our probation system, where you, after you once
get on probation, you can't leave the county
without a county permission. And if you get picked
up someplace else, you wasn't supposed to be
there, then you can be put in jail. So I guess they
have very little knowledge of what's going on
outside. Well, I think they get more knowledge
than maybe we'll give them credit for, because of
grapevine. I'm just talking about the
constraints on your freedom of travel. and the
controls are put on you. And they spend more time
there probably checking on each other than they do
doing meaningful work. So you never know who's
gonna be checking on who. So they have a lot of
people looking over your shoulder and you don't
know who's gonna turn you in. You don't know who the
KGB necessarily is. So there's a lot of concern
there as far as reporting and activities you're
doing. What's your overall impression of them?
Like myself, I think of Russians as not
necessarily looking like us, or I think of them as
mean and out to get us and things like that. What is
your overall impression after being there of
them? I like them. I like them in the sense that
they're very humane. We've got propaganda. We
were proprianderized every day, every time we
turned the radio on. We were bombarded.
Unfortunately, we were bombarded so much we're
into the point of being complacent as far as I'm
concerned. We don't understand the true fear of
problems like somebody invading our country. The
Russians suffered a lot over the many, many years.
If you know your Russian history, I don't know that
much, but we never have been invaded. They were
invaded many times. The people themselves,
they're neat. They're as neat as any other person
you met. And one interesting thing about Russia is
you didn't have to go to Florida to find somebody
who spoke fluent English. Walking down the street
in a building or wherever, you'd always find
people who spoke good English. There's probably
those who didn't say they spoke good English who
did also speak good English.
So there is somewhat concern there of,
they think we're the oppressors, we're the
aggressors. I'll give you, guess the best example
I can give you. I was on an interview or on a tour to
the, what I guess you'd call the Greek Orthodox
Church. Church is equivalent to the Vatican of
Russia. I think there's like 13 nations that makes
up Russia totally. I've sort of forgotten how
many. I think it's around 13. Many nations make up
Russia. It's got a big language integration
problem, the overall nation itself. Even though
it is huge, it's more than one language, et cetera.
Greek Orthodox Church is the main church there. We
took a tour of their facilities, equivalent to the
Vatican, and had an excellent reception. And
after many glasses of champagne, vodka, cognac,
et cetera, and a fantastic meal, and went through
it and showed us through the facilities. And
the the head person, the orthodox minister, the
head man, I went up and talked to him as I was
leaving, departing his company. And he held my
hand and he says, I wish you'd go back and tell your
people that not to be so aggressive.
And now these people, see, if you believe in the
Bible and believe in the church and all that sort of
stuff. And here he's dedicated his whole life to
doing that. And they're not supposed to be
controlled by the government. Okay, they are to a
certain extent, but they sort of, they don't, they
back off of them for it, I can tell a little bit
anyhow. Just to say something like that gives you
the overall general opinion is that
we're looked at as We look to them like bad guys
sometimes, too, I think. Of course, that's true,
obviously, because they do a lot of propaganda and
say, hey, UAS is bad, and all that sort of stuff.
Yeah, boy, they really do bad. In fact, an
interesting comment Jared made to you is that, to
fill that thought in, was that they take and daily
go through the Western paper headlines and pick
out the headlines liners of all the papers, and
construct a paper, like a western, I got some
copies, you know, like a western paper, and it has,
you know, headlines like, three people murdered
last night in New York, five people raped in Los
Angeles, and 15 banks robbed, and so on and so
forth. No good news. Just go through and pick out
that, and that's what they say, that's a daily
paper. and it's really disgusting to read all
that. After you get over and read this, you say,
God, the whole Western world has gone nuts. So
anyhow, there's, I think one thing you have to
remember is I think the Communist Party is only
equivalent to about 5% of the makeup of the Russian
people, so they keep a pretty big thumb on the
people, so that the majority of the people are not
the Communists. which surprised me. It's a small
percentage, I don't know if 5% is right or not. Go
ahead. Well you're currently working on the
proposed space station you were talking about and
what will that station be used for and its cost to us
and its benefits to society? Can you describe that
a
little bit? That's a big piece to talk about Tara.
It's obviously the next step into our manned
presence of space. It's, I think, a very logical
step. And that will establish a platform facility
that will be manned. Hopefully, we're looking at
having it permanently manned. Although, we're
looking at an interim space of time where we might
do a man-tended option, as we call it now. where you
just go up and man it from time to time. We might not
even take that option, but we're going to go into, I
say, a total manned environment, working
probably from six to eight crewmen to start with.
Is it similar to like what Russia has? No, it's
going to be a lot more sophisticated than what they
have currently in orbit. It will be permanently
manned. We'll be making round trips up there.
Right now, that has to be determined, but we'll be
going up probably to the station every 30 days to
every 90 days, somewhere in that frequency. We'll
be manufacturing all kinds of goods at the
station. We cannot manufacture here on Earth,
especially on an economical basis, because for
those manufacturing processes, it requires no
gravity, a high degree of vacuum, weightless,
well, the weightlessness of gravity goes
together.
Minimum amount of contaminations and will allow
making better transistors, for example. There's
medicines that they can make on orbit that is
uneconomically feasible to make them on Earth.
And it'll basically be a moving towards
commercial land, ground observations,
mineral research into various mineral locations
around the earth as far as observations from these
facilities and studying other planets and that
sort of stuff from the observatory position.
We'll be probably be just as shattering on our
society as the other, as the current program has
had up to date. What about the cost? It's going to
be, I mean the development cost to put the vehicle
up, I mean the station up, it's going to be
expensive, but it depends on how you measure
expense. Right now we're trying to design to a
station that we can deliver to the Cape to the
launch facility for $8 billion. That doesn't
include launches, to put it in orbit.
Along with that, the Europeans, or the
international involvement, are talking up to
contributing as much as the equivalent of $4
billion. So that would make it something like an
integrated program of $12 billion. And that's the
going in price side. We may have to take some
shortcuts to meet those costs. How large are we
talking about a station? How large would it be?
Good question. I don't have the exact dimensions
down.
We're talking about like four habitat modules, or
four modules sort of interconnected together
that would be working positions and sleeping
quarters and that sort of stuff for initially like
six crew people. I think the total configuration
of the station weighs somewhere between 300 and
400,000 pounds. So, the orbiter weighs 240,000
pounds. So, In gross wage, you're looking at
something that a neighborhood weighs as much as
two water chairs or less. Which will have large
solar panels and that sort of stuff on this
facility. Another big pro- one of the major things
and one of the projects that functions in my office
is to make people realize is that we're going to be
operating this thing for the next 20 to 30 years up
there. So everything we put on it, we have to be able
to repair it in space. We had to have places to store
spare parts. We had a big logistics problem of
getting supplies up and returning supplies down,
and that sort of thing. So it's going to be pretty
much a manned facility, just like a place up in
Greenland or something like that, and you're
having to go provide supplies and things to it.
When is, what are they thinking about, or is it in
the planning stages, or are we near ready to take a,
you know, start on that? We're currently in a
position, we've gone through the phase A studies.
Let me try to explain to you how we go through basic
programs with NASA.
We'll go through a phase A conceptual idea, like,
almost to the point like, hey, there will be a space
station. Then you go through the second phase of
design, phase B. Yes, there will be a space
station, and this is what it looks like, and this is
what it contains. And that's basically all on
paper. And then there's what we call the phase C and
D, or C slash D. And phase C is where you actually
build it. You cut the hardware, start
manufacturing. And D is where you go into
operation and those sort of go together, those two
stations. We're currently in phase B, starting
phase B April 1st this year. And we're currently,
the total program is going to select eight major
contractors divided between four centers around
the United States to come up with the basic design
within, currently shooting for 21 months. to be
done with that. Well, you were talking earlier
about other countries and contributions. You are
part of a six-member panel that's meeting in
Washington to discuss what those contributions
will be. What countries are we talking about? What
contributions? And is Russia among those
countries? Okay, number one, Russia is not among
those countries. We're talking basically for the
European nations, Western nations. The,
currently three groups of people have expressed a
desire to join us into this activity. One is ESA
from Europe, which is the European Space Agency. I
believe it's made up of like 10 countries, totally
sort of conglomeration of people who have joined
us, and we've just got two going through one
session, a successful venture with them.
and that's the space lab. They built the space lab
for us, and they build and we fly it. Now, the Jap-
and they're talking about a significant piece of
the operation getting involved in terms of
money's concerned. Japanese are interested and
they're wanting to get involved, and the
Canadians are interested, and we've done one also
interesting operation with Canadians. with the
arm, with a remote manipulator system. So,
currently we have those three. What we're trying
to do in this committee is try to give the
negotiators some idea of what would be logical to
let the Europeans or these international
involvement do and what is not logical to do. So
what we're trying to do is to break that down and one
of the big problems is that we need to figure out,
they can't just contribute dollars, they gotta
contribute goods. So it's like a bartering
system. So when we define an activity that they
could do, we also need to try to cost that activity,
try to come up with some idea of what the equivalent
dollar cost is for that particular function. I
guess it's similar to like your, say your car. If
you let some facility change the oil in it, it'd be
like a European country. And you know what
basically that dollar cost is. You know the cost of
oil, you know the cost of, you know what it costs to
do the change out. And say, well, we'd give them the
job of change no oil in your car for the next twenty
years. That's pretty straightforward.
Why isn't Russia being, they're not expressed
interest or is it just that we don't really want
their help in this or don't want to consider
Eastern European countries?
They haven't. I don't know the total details of
that. Obviously we wouldn't be asking them to, I
think, join us into this venture. We might share
some joint activities later, but I think it's too
much involved and too much technology involved
here. We want to watch the technology transfer we
have between nations and very definitely we will
be doing some state-of-the-art stuff. when we're
building this facility. So their involvement
might be in terms of actually coming and visiting
this station at some time with other vehicles or
something like that. Or we might run some joint
experiments together. And generally those
things have worked out as we sort of go the line
between the western and eastern countries.
Recently the government bought the Columbia into
its first top secret military flight. Press
reports said that that the cargo was a spy
satellite used for listening in on the Russians.
Do you feel that the government's goal, our
government's goal in space has been shifted from
exploratory to military aims? No, I don't think
so. The military has always been somewhat, has
been interested in the orbiter, in the orbiter
program, and they're a customer for us to fly, and
We charge them so much per flight to make those
flights and they're just like any other customer.
What administrations would you describe as being
more military oriented? Speaking of those from
say John F. Kennedy to Reagan.
Well Reagan's obviously I think the more, he's
more interested in the military than Probably the
rest of the presidents and probably the rest of
them combined.
There's an interesting balance there, I guess,
between what you do and how you operate. But
definitely Reagan has been very high on the
military and what it does. I think the rest of the
presidents, I'd rate them about equal. I can't
see.
I can't see, I can't think of anything that would
really pull one out above the other one right now.
Are the programs, you being a part of NASA, the ones
you're working on, are they primary research
oriented or are they having some kind of military
applications being thought about?
Most of the programs we work on is more in the
research and working with customer
requirements. For example, the evolution of the
overall space program has gone from putting man in
space, to putting man on the moon, to
doing, that was basically just doing tasks. And at
that time we really wasn't worried too much about
customer requirements. And then when we started
in the skylight program, we started to get a little
more interested in what can we do for the customer.
There's more than one just, hey, go do the task.
It's like climbing a mountain. After you climb the
mountain, what do you do when you get there? So in
the Skylab program, we started looking for
customers and doing some customer interface,
more so than we'd done in the past. And you're
seeing a steady trend of that now as we move on into
the
Space Transportation System program, which is
the orbiter. We moved in, that's going to be pretty
well totally commercialized and be,
tend to go more in the commercial world. And I guess
what I'm trying to say to answer that question is
that we're really going more commercial all the
time and trying to satisfy as usual requirements
because we're paying bucks to fly. In the past,
NASA's been dependent on congressional
appropriations for money. Is there a chance that
maybe, you know, this trend toward
commercialism, is there a chance that maybe in the
future NASA won't be dependent upon that money?
NASA will always be dependent upon money, but
you've got to consider what NASA has used for you.
NASA's used to do advanced research and
development. As you get stuff operational, then
it'll be converted over to commercial use. For
example, we're going through a major contract
right now, a change, coming up this fall, where
we're going to contract most of the activities
associated, operations activities associated
with the space, with the Orbiture, to
contractors. We're going to turn this whole
facility, those buildings over there, they get
turned over to, they don't occupy those
buildings, but the tasks that those buildings are
doing gets turned over to contractors who as hate
by other government agencies who wants to fly on
the orbiter, and the commercial people who want to
fly on the orbiter, they pay hard dollars, and that
becomes similar to how we subsidize the airlines.
First, you know, FACA, which was the old, old NASA,
developed the aircraft, everything worked out,
and they then started converting the aircraft,
turning the aircraft over to commercial
commercial people and that's how the airline
industry got started. Or this is the start of the
space industry.
What effect has the military's recent
involvement in space have on future
non-militaristic flights? Are you considering
the military just a customer or are they actually
having an input on scheduling and what you're
carrying and anything like that? They are
basically customers. They compete for flight
schedules, flights for the vehicles. And if they
buy the total vehicle, they get dedicated
flights. And if they buy partial loads, they get
integrated flights. And I look at them as being
just competition. are users of the system, and we
provide them the capability to do those
particular activities. When we went to the moon, a
plaque was left behind that said, Here men from the
planet Earth first set foot on the moon July 1969
A.D. We came in peace for all mankind. Do you think
that we, being Americans, are still in space for
peaceful reasons? I would think so. I don't hear
any reasons for it or not. Of course, I'm not into
all the military stuff, and even if I was, I
probably couldn't say much about it. Do you feel
that space will be the next location for a military
arms buildup? It has definitely the potential of
being that. As a militaristic person, it has
definite advantages.
So you do think it will be? I didn't say I didn't
think it would be, but if I had something to do in
those terms, I would look in that direction for
sure. It makes things a lot simpler. I guess what's
made me ask that question is Reagan's influence
on, you know, that he keeps denying, you know,
about Star Wars, you know, accusations that he's
working towards having Star Wars, you know, but
he's at the same time wanting to put satellites up
that, you know, are listening in on the Russians
and stuff. and defense weapons up there. Well, it
depends on the national policy and how you go, but
space definitely offers some inherent
advantages to, in a militaristic sense. I mean,
this talks about having hydrogen bomb powered
lasers where you point to lasers at a city or a
target and set the bomb off, and if that's an energy
source for the lasers, a laser just erases the
facility which you got pointed at. That's pretty
interesting.
On to a different topic, when you first went to work
for NASA, were blacks and women employed in
professional jobs such as your own? Yes, they
were. How have hiring procedures changed with
regard to blacks and women in response to the civil
rights and equal rights movements,
respectively? I can't, technically I really
can't tell that it changed that much until I think
it was always pretty open as far as I could tell. The
problem we've always had is having qualified
people to fulfill those positions. look on the
qualified or quality of the people you're getting
is what's been the main driver, and I think in
recent years, women have got more involved in the
subjects of engineering, etc. I'm sure,
potentially, it's never bothered me in my 20 years
of working here at NASA, it's never bothered me. In
fact, I never did look at, number one, I couldn't,
but I personally never did. And the people I've
worked with as far as I know have never used those as
discriminators. We always look at the
qualifications. Has there been any resentment by
white male employees, or has everybody, like you
say, just kind of always accepted it? We have a sort
of unique society here, I think, and we're all
pretty much on a, on a, uh, solastic involvement
where you try to, uh, Those problems that you
associate in other industries, I think we see a lot
less of here.